And let's pray and let's get right into this.
Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to talk on these sensitive, difficult issues, Lord.
But we thank you, Lord, because you have a remedy for sin and addiction.
And so Lord, we are asking right now for Holy Ghost power.
We are asking Lord for angels to dwell with us in this room.
Angels that excel in wisdom and strength.
And I am praying right now, Lord, that chains begin to be broken just as we study this subject.
So Lord, there are some in here who have family members who are suffering from addiction or addictive behaviors, Lord.
And there are others that may be suffering themselves.
It doesn't really matter, Lord.
What matters today is that you have the key that can unlock any chain and set anyone free who's willing to come to you.
So Lord, as we study this,
today Lord, we're just asking again for Holy Spirit power that He would lead us into truth.
This is our prayer in Jesus' name.
Amen.
All right, come on in and have a seat.
So the overall topic for the day is addiction in the last days.
And our first session is called a generation addicted.
drugs, demons, and a rising death toll.
Let me start with a story from my practice.
I was practicing in California, and a young man came in on a Thursday with a cold or flu symptoms.
It seemed like it was just viral.
I basically told him go home, drink fluids, get some rest.
And he asked me to take him off to Friday.
So it was Thursday.
So I took him out of work on Friday.
seemed like no big deal.
He, you know, I'd see him back at work on Monday.
You know, he actually worked in our building.
I'd see him back on work on Monday.
And of course I knew, because I'd seen him before in his chart that he had overcome opiates.
He had overcome opiate addiction.
He had been cleaning sober for six months when I saw him.
But when he went home that day and had the day off in his boredom,
Temptation snuck up on him, and that Saturday, he went and got street drugs, heroin.
Now, his addiction began when he played football in high school, hurt his knee, and they gave him Vicodin and Norcos, which are pretty potent narcotic pain medicines.
And if you just take those medicines for seven days, almost anyone will develop a habit or become dependent on it.
Let me say that again.
If you just take the narcotic pain medicines, the way they're prescribed, usually by day seven, you will have a dependence on those medicines.
And that's what happened to this young man.
Obviously, you all heard in the news how much trouble there is with opiates, so all of us doctors in hospital, everybody stop prescribing.
And I'm gonna talk to you about why we got into this opiate mess in the first place.
And so that Saturday,
he actually goes back and finds heroin to take.
And because he had been cleaning sober for six months, he goes back and takes the amount of heroin he took six months earlier.
So he just tried to jump right back in where he was, and he overdosed at home and he died.
When I came to work on Monday, I was blown away that
Person I saw died.
Let me tell you what really gave me pause.
And if you guys are in the back and you want to sit up front, there are seats up here.
So don't feel embarrassed.
Just come right on down.
What made me feel bad is that when I was seeing him, I had an, God impressed me that I should pray with him.
I pray with my patients all the time.
But I was so busy that day and I was like, well, I'll see him again.
I'll talk to him again.
And I didn't pray with him.
What hurt me that Monday morning when they told me what happened
is that I missed the opportunity to pray over this brother before he went and overdosed.
I tell you that story because this thing, it's for real.
It doesn't take much for drugs and alcohol to actually take someone's life as we're going to see.
And so what I want us to do as we discussed this is I'm gonna really lay out the problem, how it happens, but we're also gonna lay out at the end of the day,
kind of proactive steps to fighting addiction.
What can you do in your home, in your family, in your community if you're trying to help someone or if you suffer yourself?
So all of that is going to be discussed.
So let's get into this a little more.
And I want to read 1 Thessalonians 5 because tomorrow morning we're really going to look at this from a spiritual standpoint.
There is a reason the devil wants us all addicted to stuff.
He gains a lot from it.
First Thessalonians five and verse six says, therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let us do what?
Watch and be sober for they that sleep in the night and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.
But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love.
And for a helmet, what?
The hope of salvation.
This text really sums it all up and it speaks to this addicted generation.
Now, the talk is called drugs, demons and a rising death toll.
And to get to it, we really jump here.
Second Timothy three, one says this, no, also that in the last days, what perilous time shall come?
Do you feel like the days are perilous?
Are they challenging and difficult?
There has never for young people in the room,
you must understand that in all of Earth's history, it has never been more difficult to be a young person and try and follow God than in 2026.
In all of human history, it has never been as difficult because never in human history has the technology and availability of evil and wicked influences been so close, so close that we go to an iPhone shop or a
Galaxy phone shot, wherever you get your phone from.
And we buy a portal for the devil to influence us with.
We literally pay it and every month we make a payment so that in our pocket or in our purse, all day, every day, the devil has access to us.
Never been so difficult.
So the times truly are perilous.
For men shall be lovers of their own selves.
We'll go back over these verses again later.
Covetches, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truth breakers, false accusers, incontinent fears, despisers of those that are what?
In the last days, if you are good, you will be despised.
Unfortunately, too many of us think we're going to be good and the world still like us.
You got another thing coming, honey.
The world is not going to like you.
Paul then says, traders, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than what?
More than lovers of God.
In that statement, Paul, who is at this time writing to Timothy from a Roman dungeon about to be put to death by Nero, he is warning Nero of end time addiction.
Lovers of pleasures, more than what?
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but what?
Denying the power thereof.
From such, turn away.
Pair pressure is one of the reasons people sink into addiction so quickly and heavily the Bible says from such do what?
Turn away.
What is it that's missing in that last group in that sentence?
What is this power that they're denying?
Holy, ghost,
power.
There is another power at work in these people in the last days.
I want to submit to you that once you have sided with Satan and stepping into bad habits and addictions, you give him a control over you that he is not easily going to let go of.
You've walked yourself into this and by default, you must deny the power of God because once you accept the power of God,
You can't stay in bondage.
All right, we'll come back to that.
All right.
So we talked about this one.
Let me jump here.
So I wanted to put this up.
This is a face of all the celebrities, well, not all of them, many of the celebrities who have died of overdose.
You recognize anybody up there?
I do.
One of my favorite people up there is the most talented singer I think in a generation, maybe in many generations, Whitney Houston.
Why do celebrities die from drug overdose like this?
And I mean, you go all the way back to Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe, Jimi Hendrix.
Why does it happen?
Because they don't have a rock bottom.
When you make that kind of money, you run out of life before you run out of the means to continue your addiction.
The reason a lot of people actually sober up is they hit rock bottom.
They have nothing.
They can't get the drugs.
They're forced to recover.
But when you have all these resources, the other thing is the devil sets these folk up as people for us to imitate.
And what he does, he sets us up to imitate them.
And one of the behaviors they want us to imitate is they're smoking and drinking, drug using and sexual corruption.
Right?
So it uses celebrity.
I mean, very sad slide.
When you look at all those lives lost too early.
So what is addiction?
It is a chronic relapsing brain disorder.
characterized by compulsive behaviors and loss of control, despite harmful consequences.
It encompasses substance related and behavioral addictions, gambling, social media.
If you ask people, what does it mean to be addicted?
It means you have a behavior that you can't stop doing simply by willpower.
To understand addiction, you have to understand this.
And we'll get into it more.
But the moral decision is made when you choose to try cocaine.
When you know cocaine is bad for you, and in order to escape life of numb pain, you try cocaine, that's where the moral failure actually happens.
Six years later, when you are chemically addicted to cocaine, you're still having some moral failure, but now you have a chemical addiction that means the moral failure is not what's leading.
Most drug addicts, if they could, they would stop.
Or I should say most.
Many of them would.
And so they're trapped.
And as a church sometimes, we don't understand that this is an intersection between spiritual warfare, chemical addiction, and a disease.
And that intersection is why you have to treat people differently.
I mean, most of our churches, we talk about the health message.
How many of our churches have addiction recovery programs?
Very few of them, right?
So imagine if part of our health message was, we can help you stop.
We used to do that with cigarettes.
cigarette stop smoking programs the churches used to do.
So let's look at this.
This is the use of illicit drugs over time in the United States of America and you can see this just up to 2024 but just in the last few years it has increased 73.6 million people age 12 and older nearly 49 million Americans one out of six almost had a substance use disorder in the past year.
16.7 to 17.1% of American 12 and older have experienced substance misuse or substance use dependence.
I mean, these numbers are pretty staggering, especially when you consider you're starting from 12 years old.
But when I speak to many addicts, you know what they tell me?
That's when they started.
They actually started with addictive substances very early, including pornography.
We'll see when we get to that this afternoon.
13% of Americans, 12 plus reported illicit use in the past month and 25%, one out of every four people, 12 and older have used an illegal or misused prescription drugs in the last year.
So this is huge.
So one of the things that's been going on as you've seen these boat strikes off the coast of Venezuela, it worries me a little bit because I would like for them to know who they're attacking
and arrest the people who are sending them on the boats with the drugs.
Right?
I'd like them to get the kingpins, but that's just me.
So they're blowing these boats up, but let me key you in on America's real issue.
America war on drug.
It focuses on supplies.
We're always attacking cartels, drug posses.
We're always doing that.
But the reality of America's drug problem isn't a supply problem.
It is a demand problem.
How do I notice?
Because as I worked in addiction medicine, you watched and just watching the trends in life.
In the 80s, it was crack and cocaine.
You go back to the 70s, it was heroin.
It changes, changes, changes.
When they got really strict after 9-11 in 2001, and it was difficult to just fly little planes in from the Bahamas and bring in the drugs or from wherever, all of a sudden, the drugs coming from outside the country dropped.
What did Americans do?
They broke bad.
There's even a TV show called Breaking Bad.
They actually went and got cough syrup, right?
With Suda fed in it and began to make in laboratories state side crystal methamphetamines.
It is not a supply problem.
It is a demand problem and even the opiate problem.
Many people don't notice the opiate addiction for all this opiate talking, talking about.
It started when Jacob, the joint commissions, how many of you work in a hospital or have ever worked in a hospital?
You know what it's like when Jacob's coming.
Everybody's on their best behavior, run around like it's Friday evening and your mother coming home and expect the house clean, right?
So everybody's running around trying to straighten the hospital out.
Jacob came out and said in cahoots we found out later on with the drug companies that if pain had to be the fifth vital sign, how many remember when that happened?
Now that was not an objective measure, like blood pressure or temperature.
It was subjective.
And what happened?
Well, when patients now said that they had a lot of pain, if you didn't treat them, Jacob would punish you.
Providers, nurses and doctors all worried they would lose their licenses.
So what happened?
Everybody, patients said, I got a lot of pain.
They got a lot of really good drugs, started a lot of addiction, and that's how the whole thing started.
And they were all in cahoots.
The drug companies made fortunes, even after they settled some of these lawsuits, they're still going to walk away with fortunes.
That's how the whole thing started.
So when you look at all of this, America, the problem isn't that we have too much supply coming in.
It's that we have a country of people who are so spiritually messed up, they need drugs to feel normal.
That's the real problem in America.
Americans make up 5% of the world's population we consume depending on the year, anywhere from 80 to 90% of the world's narcotics.
Now, when we go to evangelize, are we preaching to people who hurt so much they want to numb their pain by getting drunk or high?
We've got to preach in a way that they find that Jesus is actually what they need.
Right?
Because that's what drives the whole epidemic of addiction here.
Now, so alcohol's impact worldwide.
So let's step away from the United States.
2.6 million global deaths every year in 2019, I should say, but about that annually due to alcohol.
Two points this morning, I don't think 2.6 million people live in Jamaica.
2.6 million people is a lot of people die every year from alcohol.
Excessive alcohol use causes 178,000 deaths in the United States every year.
How many?
178,000.
That's a staggering number.
So there's other, there are other, I don't want to just talk about drugs.
Gambling disorder, right?
Clinically-recognized.
It affects about 2.5 million Americans.
I had an uncle who was a gambling addict.
He never had money, never had anything.
Once his son got big enough, he would wear his son's shoes.
because he's always losing everything and so forth.
I remember he went to the horse track and he lost all his money in the horse track and we lived in Connecticut.
He was maybe, I don't know, gotta be like 15 miles from the horse track back to now, maybe 20.
And he lost his money so bad he had to walk back home in the cold in Connecticut.
Why is, I mentioned this, I'm not gonna get too much of the gambling addiction there, but I wanna say this.
Have you noticed the push now for sports gambling?
I want to submit to you that Satan is in an all out attack.
There is nothing he is not doing from the legalizing of recreational marijuana to sports betting.
He is coming with all kinds of attempts and attacks to bind men's souls.
And it's working.
I mean, the sports gambling and making fortunes.
Social media addiction, 10% of Americans may be addicted to social media.
Social media is addicting, they call it the death scroll.
And the way they designed it, we'll talk more about it later, but the way they designed it is you scroll up because the way the human mind is designed, if you scroll up, what are you supposed to hit at some point?
A bottom.
So why does one of the reasons you just keep scrolling?
You're waiting for the bottom.
Is there a bottom coming?
And then what kind of content do they put into it?
Trashy.
manipulative content.
In fact, right now, if I was doing this seminar on spiritualism, spiritualism is one of the fastest growing religions in the country.
Wicca and witchcraft is the fastest growing religion among young Americans.
Wicca and witchcraft.
And now, with the move towards African-American, Latino-Americans, and kind of restoring their cultural heritage, what's happening is things like Obia, Jamaicans, Voodoo,
Santaria, these things are now beginning very popular, even slipping into some of our churches.
Your church ought not be doing yoga, right?
So all this spiritualism is coming in.
It is social media, something called witch talk that is actually getting many of people how to learn how to cast spells, how to learn how to become a witch.
All of that is happening through social media.
Satan has an evangelism tool like he's never had before.
So social media addiction is problematic because it not only does it waste your time, it exposes your bad stuff.
That's how a lot of young people actually get into pornography in the first place.
So 33 million Americans may be addicted to social media.
Women more than men.
Young adults are most affected.
Heavy uses linked to mood, productivity, and impulse control issues.
1% of US population has a gambling disorder.
Higher rates of suicidality seen among problem gamblers.
versus non-gamblers.
So people get into gambling.
One of the ways they get out of debt is they take their life.
These are serious life and death issues.
You see them put ESPN bed up.
You see them put FanDuel or whatever it's called up.
And you think, oh, no big deal.
But if you read the fine print at the bottom, it says gamble responsibly.
If you become addicted, can you be responsible about your addictive behavior?
It's like the alcohol commercial.
And at the end, they say, drink responsibly.
If you could drink responsibly, they wouldn't have to tell you to drink responsibly.
Because by default, once you start drinking, being responsible starts to go out the window from a chemical perspective.
So in order to, what we don't want is for death to be the rock bottom.
And again, I'll show you some of these faces.
I mean, you don't want life to leave people like this.
And it's a serious thing.
So some of the questions we're going to address, how do addictions begin?
What factors lead society toward addictive behaviors?
Why are so many young people developing addiction?
What does the Bible teach about it?
And how does addiction affect salvation?
And so we're going to talk about that over to all of the five ways we go.
So what are some of the causes of drug abuse?
So if you look here, I should have took out my pointer.
I will for the next one, right?
Psychological, right?
So people get on drugs to relieve tension and depression.
There's something to do for curiosity.
and removing boredom.
And I'm gonna show you the verse of the Bible that tells you that this is exactly how people get into abominable behaviors.
Literally said that way.
Social, bad peer group, disruption of family, association with gangs.
If you get into the wrong group, as they say in my family's Jamaican, they say in Jamaica, if you lay with dog, your eyes would flee.
So you get into a group that does this, you're in trouble.
Miscellaneous, solving personal problems, improving study.
And this one here is interesting because
A lot of people are getting on stimulants like Ritalin in order to be at a better students.
And as a doctor, I kind of warn against that unless you really, really need it because a lot of people are taking it, don't really need it.
They're trying to get like superpowers.
And then there's of course the physiological, removing pain to get sleep, to stay asleep, all of these different things.
But I want to submit to you that one of the major reasons we have the drug addiction problem we have
is that people have lost a sense of purpose.
Stanford sociologist wrote a whole book on this and it says that the number one reasons young people have mental health problems is not because the young person, not because the young person has too much stress in their life, but because they don't have enough purpose in their life.
And what has happened to society to remove purpose?
Well, we teach kids, you don't actually come from the hand of a loving God, you are the product of a cosmic accident.
Evolution and a big bang.
There is no God, right?
So you rip that from the child from an early age.
I went to the fifth and sixth grade.
That's what they taught me in public school.
Right?
You rip that from the child.
Then you're now, people aren't getting married like they used to.
People don't stay on jobs longterm like they used to.
They don't live around family like they used to.
All of the things that used to add purpose to life is gone for a lot of people.
And so purpose, when you lose purpose, you're in trouble.
And ultimately, the best way to get purpose is in Christ Jesus.
So when you combine the lack of purpose with the ideas of the world, you get addiction, disease, bad behaviors, bad habits, all of it begins to happen, right?
Some stuff on purpose here.
Young adults in purpose.
The major reason report found out nearly three in five young adults, about 58% report experience in little or no meaning or purpose in their lives in the last month.
It's linked to anxiety and depression 60% of young adults say they lack purpose describing the days as repetitive and directional So I'm gonna show you the Bible verse on this teens of purpose a smaller study of US high school students Suggested only 17% of freshmen and 23% of seniors report having a clear sense of purpose.
You're about to graduate high school and you have no purpose Right um
Other research of 12,000 teenagers and young adults found roughly 25% had an idea of a purpose they wanted to pursue.
So these numbers are staggering.
Youth who report a lack of purpose also report significantly higher rates of anxiety and depression compared to those who feel they have meaning.
Feeling adrift is frequently mentioned as a contributor to poor mental health outcomes among young adults, including lack of direction and not knowing what to do at life.
They are adrift because what you must be anchored to as the old hymn says,
Will your anchor hold?
What are you supposed to be anchored to?
Christ Jesus.
Right?
Without that, you're going to be a drip.
This world is crazy.
So imagine you don't know God and you lose a loved one.
You don't know God.
You're a teenager and your parents divorce.
Right?
It's difficult to make sense of the world if you don't understand the great controversy.
I was asked by one of the presidents at one of the Adventist conferences in Australia.
He said, every time I hire a pastor, I ask him this question.
He said, I ask him, why are you a seven day Adventist?
He said, I'm gonna ask you that, Dr. Wallsworth.
Why are you a seven day Adventist?
I said, simple.
Because Adventism answers the most important questions we have in life.
It answers them all.
What happens when you die?
Why am I here?
Why is evil in the world?
It answers every question.
Without that, you drift.
And here's what happens when you drift.
Here's why that is so scary.
Without purpose, pleasure becomes the highest calling.
Let me say that again.
I want you to get this.
So, I was in Australia, Sydney, preaching, and I was talking to some young people, and they said here in Sydney, and I heard the same thing in England,
They said, if you go out drinking with your buddies, they say your mates, if you go out drinking with your buddies and you can remember what happened the night before, you didn't have a good time.
In other words, you didn't have a good time if you didn't black out drinking.
When you get to that point, pleasure becomes the highest calling Satan has you.
This is why in second Timothy chapter three, Paul says lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God because they without God, they have no purpose.
Pleasure's all that's left.
And here's the thing.
The way you experience pleasure is through the limbic system in the brain.
We'll talk more about it in a second.
Through the neurotransmitter dopamine.
That's where all of you farior in the pleasure happens.
Here's what many of us don't understand.
Satan understands the way your brain works better than you do.
So once he's got you purposeless, ah, now he's got you, period.
Right.
And so even if that pleasure is just to numb the brain, let me, let me, just to, just to, while we're on pleasure for the new year, let me give this to somebody because there's a young person in here who God has called to great things.
Right now you think you can't do what God is calling you to do.
You may not have even heard the call yet.
But here's what Jeremiah is told Jeremiah, 2 9 11 says, for I know the plans I have for you says the Lord plans to prosper you and not to harm you plans to give you a future and a hope.
Here's one of the reason knowing God is so important.
We read it in Thessalonians.
Put on for a helmet, the what?
The hope of salvation.
What hope is it that God is giving you here?
We think it's the hope of maybe one day owning your own business.
That maybe you will own your own business.
I came to tell you, the hope that you ought to have is the hope of salvation.
It changes the way you behave.
Changes what you expose yourself to when you understand what God's plan for you is.
Right?
And that's why it says here, but let us, us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love and as a helmet, the hope of salvation.
Hebrews 6 18 through 20 says this, that by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation.
We have fled for refuge till they hold upon the hope set before us.
Here's that word hope again.
which hope we have as an anchor for the soul.
Why are they floating around?
They don't have an anchor for the soul.
Both shore and steadfast and which entered into that within the veil.
Whether the forerunners for us entered even Jesus made a high priest after the order of Melchizedek.
Once you understand what Christ not only did for you at the cross, but what he's doing for you in the most holy place now,
It changes everything.
That sanctuary message that so many people don't want us to talk about anymore and want you to skip over.
I've heard people even at some of our own institutions say it's not biblical.
Let me tell you, they are a liar and the truth is not in them.
That message is powerful.
It tells you the course and direction of salvation.
It adds purpose.
You begin to understand that your purpose is to develop the character of Christ and then to help others find that Christ so they can develop that character as well.
You have purpose beyond purpose when you understand and know the high priest.
And salvation of course happens in the frontal lobe.
So we're going to talk more about it tomorrow morning.
I'll really break it down and how the sanctuary message actually lays out over your body.
And the frontal lobe, this part of your brain, the prefrontal cortex is literally where sin is dealt with.
It is the most holy place in the human body.
It is where Christ is in the heavenly temple.
It's where the Holy spirit is in you.
Somebody ought to say amen.
You want the Holy spirit there in control as we're going to talk about salvation.
That's where it happens.
And so the devil wants to destroy your frontal lobe.
He wants to wipe out your reasoning centers.
In fact, in Isaiah 1, 18, we'll do this again tomorrow morning.
It says, come now, let us reason together says the Lord.
Though your sins, we are scarlet, we wide as snow.
Where does reasoning happen?
The frontal lobe.
The devil wants you unreasonable.
And when you're intoxicated, high addicted or in these horrible habits, you cannot reason with God for salvation.
Here's the reality.
Addiction blocks your ability to be saved.
I shouldn't say addiction.
Intoxication blocks your ability to be saved.
Once you get into that trap.
And so that's where salvation happens.
So.
Revelation 7, 2, 3, do not harm the earth till we have done what?
Seal the servants of our God in their foreheads.
That's where the seal of God goes, your frontal lobe.
Revelation 9, 4, only those men who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
Isaiah 8, 16, bind up the testimony.
Seal the law among my disciples.
Hebrews 8, 10, I will put my laws into their mind and write them in their hearts.
The law is to be in the mind where the seal of God goes because they both represent the same thing from different angles.
Psalm 48, Psalm 48 verse eight, I delight to do thy will, oh my God, yea, thy law is where?
Within my heart.
All right?
And so you jumped to Revelation 14 and says, and I looked and lo, a lamb stood on the Mount Zion and with him 144,000, having his father's what?
Name written in their foreheads.
What does name represent in the Bible?
Character.
Did you get that?
So in your mind is to go to seal of God.
the name of God, the law of God.
Once you start to understand it, you understand what it is the devil's trying to do, especially through addiction.
Revelation 22 says in there shall be no more cursed there, but the throne of God and the lamb shall be in it.
And his servant shall serve him and they shall see his face and his name shall be where?
In their foreheads.
The devil wants to destroy your frontal lobe.
God's name equals his character, equals his law.
equals his seal.
Satan is trying to figure out a way to make it so you don't get any of those things.
In fact, when you read about the market of beasts, we'll talk about that tomorrow.
When you talk about the market of beasts, what Satan said, what the Bible says is that you, you don't want the name or the number of the beast.
The market of beast partly is that you get Satan's name in your forehead.
You get his character of rebellion against God.
And guess where that comes from in this?
I usually do a lot of talks on music and entertainment.
But let me tell you something.
That's what the entertainment industry is trying to get you.
Every time you sit down, listen to some of this crazy music.
Somebody tell me about somebody named Doja Cat.
A girl looking like a picture, looking like a demon, crazy thing.
I'm telling you scary stuff.
I mean, a girl looks scary.
And when you listen to that music, it bypasses the frontal lobe.
goes into the auditory centers of the brain and impresses you to believe what they're singing or rapping.
Now here's what, so here's what happens to you.
That repetitive false message changes your character.
The spirit of prophecy warns that by beholding, we become changed.
You can't listen to these demonic people and not become demonic.
Just don't work.
And they want you high as a kite.
That's what they want.
They want you high.
They want you drunk.
They want you in sexual addiction.
Philippians 2 says, let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.
Our first and most important purpose is to be like Christ to have his character.
People say to me, you know, you can't preach perfectionism.
The Bible, you know, the Bible says be perfect as God is perfect.
You can't preach it.
But the Bible is not preaching that you never make a mistake.
It's preaching that you have the character of Christ when you make a mistake.
The example of that is Moses.
Moses, the Bible says in Numbers 12, was the most meek man on the planet, meekest man on the whole planet.
Yet when Moses got angry with the children of Israel, and he got angry with them often, he got angry at them at the end of his life, he was supposed to speak to the rock.
What did he do?
He struck the rock.
He sinned.
You would say, well, Moses wasn't perfect.
He can't be saved.
Some Adventists actually have that kind of attitude.
That's a bad attitude.
But you know what ended up happening?
When Moses died without seeing the promised land in person,
Michael the Archangel, Jesus Christ came and resurrected him and took him to glory.
Did his striking the rock change his character?
No.
Moses repented of what he did.
Ask God for forgiveness and reconcile with God.
And once you do this, as we'll talk about tomorrow, my Bible says God will not remember your sin anymore.
Many are in addiction because they carry shame.
They ought not be carrying.
And I'm going to, all the whole time we talk, I'm going to tell you this truth that I hope, if you don't leave at GYC with anything else, leave with this truth.
God does not barter in shame.
God does not trade in shame.
He does not, he does not pay in shame.
He does not receive shame.
He is not one who wants you shamed.
He died and carried our shame so that like the prodigal, when we get to the father, it's his robe of righteousness that's thrown on us.
And as long as you live thinking you are shameful, you cannot be saved.
We're going to get into that more later.
But that is one of the reasons people get into addiction and can't come out of it because the devil gets them.
The more they do the addiction, the more the devil tells you, you keep failing God, you're a shame.
And the difference between, let me just say it now, the difference between guilt and shame is this.
Guilt says you did something wrong, a behavior you can correct and ask for forgiveness for.
Shame says you are something wrong.
Shame says you are inherently not worth being saved.
Satan wants you to exist in shame.
And as long as we talk over these next sessions, I want you to understand Satan is always going to remind you of your past.
He's always going to try and point you in that direction.
Because if you're always looking back at yourself, if you're always looking at your weaknesses, by beholding, you will become changed to just be more like you are.
But when the devil reminds you of your past, the old preachers used to say, you need to remind him of his future.
All right?
So you got to change the way you see sin and salvation if you're going to gain victory.
And one of the reasons for that is here.
Thoughts become actions.
Actions become habits.
Habits become what?
They become character.
This is a true thing.
You got to guard your thoughts.
You have to guard your thoughts.
And here's the scary thing.
We say we want to guard our thoughts, then we sit and watch Netflix, and they're telling you everything you ought not be thinking.
And when you watch TV, it changes your brain waves, puts you in a semi-hypnotic state, from alpha waves to beta waves in the brain.
So when you're watching this stuff, you're up front alone,
which is supposed to look at what's coming in and actually decide as to what to do with it, your frontal lobe is turned off.
And then there are mirror neurons in your brain.
So when you're watching this stuff, your mind believes you're participating in it.
It's a dangerous, dangerous thing.
Guard the thoughts because thoughts become actions, actions become habits, habits become character.
Christ object lesson page 331.
But Christ has given us no assurance that to attain perfection of character is an easy matter.
A noble all-around character is not inherited.
It does not come to us by accident.
A noble character is earned by individual effort through the merits and grace of Christ.
God gives the talents, the powers of the mind, we form the character.
It is formed, watch this, it is formed by hard, stern battles with self.
Conflict after conflict must be waged against hereditary tendencies.
We shall have to criticize ourselves closely and allow not one unfavorable trait to remain what?
Uncorrected.
Is that tough?
Absolutely.
But this is why you need Jesus.
She goes on to say, let no one say I cannot remedy my defects of character.
If you come to this decision, you will certainly fail of obtaining everlasting life.
The impossibility lies in your own will, mercy.
If you will not, then you cannot overcome.
The real difficulty arises from the corruption of an unsanctified heart and an unwillingness to submit to the control of God.
A character formed according to the divine likeness is the only treasure that we can take from this world to the next.
Somebody just asked me about one of my cousins who played nana fell who murdered in his house, played for the Washington Redskins.
I just did a sermon on it, it's on audio verse.
And I say, every time I tell a story, I say, this guy had a brand new BMW.
He had a big fishing boat bigger than this room.
He lived in a mansion.
And guess what?
When we had to bury him, he didn't take none of it with him.
The only hope we have for him is that when he died, he died in Christ Jesus, having Christ character.
Cause that's the only thing you can take with you ought to change the way you live once you realize that.
He says those who are under the instruction of Christ in this world will take every divine attainment with them to the heavenly mansions and in heaven we are continually to improve.
How important then is the development of character in this life?
Drugs, alcohol and addictive behaviors are levers that demons use to control men and circumvent their ability to be like Christ.
That's what he does.
brings you down to the level of the brute beast.
I tell a story out there, I have a cousin, he liked to drink.
And back when I used to still go to clubs and stuff, back in early college, I went to visit him, he was actually at college here in Florida, I won't say which one.
And I'd go out with him.
And this dude, he'd have two or three drinks.
I never drank, me and Adventist, I'd go to the club, you know, it was a hypocrisy.
I'd go to the club, but I wouldn't drink, because I was Adventist, you know, I can't drink.
So, and he'd have two or three drinks, and this dude wants to fight.
Not me, anybody.
And sometimes, like the fool in his drunkenness would pick the biggest dude in the room.
Let me tell you something.
Once that thing takes hold of you, it marges your character.
I had uncles who treated their wives like queens all week till they started drinking that Jamaican white rum on the weekend.
And a man who took such good care of his wife during the week
would beat her on the weekend.
Alcohol changes who you are fundamentally, as we're going to talk about a little later.
So how do we get here?
Well, I always go back all the way to the beginning.
This is Walt Disney over there on the left.
And I better be careful, because it's not too far to Disneyland from here.
Disney World, actually.
Here it is.
Walt Disney said, let your heart guide you.
It whispers, so listen closely.
Right?
And then he said, follow your heart.
This brother here, this is Ernesto de la Cruz.
from the show Coco, I think it was called Coco or something like that.
The rest of the world may follow the rules, he says, but I must follow my heart.
Will you sit your child down in front of a Disney movie?
Did you know they were giving them a cult doctrine?
I mean, they're obviously teaching them a cult stuff, because this guy go talk to dead people, he goes to the world of the dead, all this kind of stuff.
Should you follow your heart?
Here's what the Bible says.
Jeremiah 17, 9, the heart,
is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, and who can know it?
That's what the heart is.
You follow your heart, and that's what the world says, oh, you do what you feel.
That come back from Alistair Crowley, the British occultist, who many rock stars that as they follow, even Jay-Z has his slogan on a t-shirt and a picture, do as thou wilt shall be the whole of the law.
Right?
Follow your heart is what they're telling you.
But following your heart brings you to this.
This is that doja cat person.
Look how scary she is.
Frightening squared.
I'm telling you, this is Snoop's gin and juice.
These people want to influence you.
I'm going to come back to this song, gin and juice and Snoop.
I'm going to come back.
Well, let me say this part about Snoop first.
Some of you old enough to remember he dropped a song a long time ago called murder was the case in the video for murder was the case.
And in the song, he literally,
Goes through the pros in the video Satan actually comes in his hospital room and he sells his soul to the devil Do you think you could just play around with selling your soul to the devil?
Kanye West everybody said oh Kanye West a Christian he made Jesus his king album.
I was waiting a little while to see what happens I'm not judging the brother, but I'm gonna take my love and wait and see I said yeah, buddy fruit.
She shall know them and
Kanye West had a lyric long time ago, standing with a comment at a BET Awards, and Kanye West said, I sold my soul to the devil, and it's a crappy deal, but at least it came with a few toys like a Happy Meal.
You think the people can sell their soul to the devil and they'll take it back?
You think there's marshals?
You can put it on layaway?
No, you can't.
And then when you listen to it, music is a conduit for spiritualism.
The devil was a choir director in heaven.
So you listen to this music, it influences you far more than you think.
And that's what all the scientific studies actually tell us.
So how are habits formed?
And where's my room person?
Oh, she's all low in the back.
OK. How are habits formed?
Well, part of it happens in the frontal lobe.
Part of it happens in the striatum, the substantia nigra.
It's in the basal ganglia where habits live in the prefrontal cortex.
So basal ganglia, there are motions and all these things happen.
The point is this, habits make things easier.
God designed you.
So imagine when sin entered the world and God sent Adam out and said, listen, by the sweat of your brow, you eat your bread, go and basically eat the herb of the field.
And Adam had to become a farmer.
He was in a garden where all you do is pick.
Now he's got a farm and he gets out there.
God designed your brain so miraculously that the more you do something, the easier it becomes to do it.
If not, practice would not make you perfect, right?
That is a God-given gift to all of us that if you do something repetitively, it becomes easier and easier and easier and easier to do, right?
And so you look at it, it's through the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, it sends it down, I won't get too into the science on this one, right?
Acetylcholine does it, it creates these things called boutons, which are French for buttons.
Right?
And the reputation deep in the groove making the action thought easier to do.
So let me show you diagrammatically.
I've been showing these slides a long time.
I love them.
You see the boutons there?
So these weren't there, though, little white dots.
Let me show it to you on a lecture micrograph.
All about these weren't there.
So the more you do it in order to have more acetylcholine available to send the signal to do the same behavior again, your body, here's where it's important, literally changes the anatomy of your brain.
Don't miss this.
actually changes the structure of your brain to make it easier to do that thing.
This is why habits make character, because you can actually mold your mind to rebel against God.
The seal of God.
Ellen White, when she speaks of the seal of God, this is what she said.
It is a settling into the truth, both intellectually and spiritually, so that you cannot be moved.
When you do this, I want you to see this.
So that bouton could represent you learning to play the piano or the cello.
Every time you sit at the piano and you move your hand over the keys, it gets easier to find the keys.
And the more you do it, the more you do it.
Till the day comes when I go to some churches, I see little kids playing the piano, looking talking.
I'm like, how is he talking, looking away talking and playing the piano.
He's got all those boutons going for him.
But it's the same thing when you see you go into a house and a little kid is on a video game and they can't get up.
They're creating boutons for that.
You can use this process for good or you can use this process for evil.
Habits move behavior from the frontal lobe and the conscious mind to the lower parts of the brain and the subconscious mind.
So that behavior becomes automatic.
When I worked in addiction medicine at the VA hospital in Loma Linda, in our preventive medicine residency we taught the nicotine stop smoking classes and the veterans would tell me,
that they could get, most of them carry their cigarettes in a pocket here, that generation.
They could get the cigarette from the box, lit and into their mouth in seconds.
Here's the kicker.
They said many times they'd be smoking the cigarette and couldn't even remember taking it out of the box or lighting it.
Because the bountains made it that easy.
It just becomes, and here's the thing, here's the beautiful thing though.
What if you do that with your devotion in the morning?
What if it's just autumn?
You just roll out of bed.
You ain't thinking about nothing, but just to get on your knees, call on the name of the Lord and read your devotion for the married couples out there.
Y'all looking for somebody.
What if you developed a habit that you put your significant other, your spouse first, and it's just the way you do that you don't develop the habit of yelling and screaming at each other.
You develop the habit where it's just natural that you love on each other.
This can be used for good, or it can be used for evil.
It can go either way.
Five minutes, all right.
Let me try and get through this first.
All right, so Ella White's Habits.
It is by a repetition of acts that habits are established and character confirmed, right?
And this is the habit loop here.
You can see it.
You get a cue.
You get a craving, right?
So if you are a musician,
You're dying to produce some music.
You sit at the piano.
You get the cue because you hear some music and you say, oh, let me sit at the piano.
You start playing.
You go through the playing of it.
You get the reward of the beautiful music and the accomplishment of playing the thing.
And you create a cycle.
But it works the same way if you're craving is for something negative.
And the cue is withdrawal, boredom, pain.
And you go through the same routine and you reinforce it.
Ellen White says habits may be modified, but seldom changed.
What the child sees and hears is drawing deep lines.
It's incredible how accurate Ellen White's writings are.
She actually explains the Boutons in a sense.
It drawing deep lines upon the tender mind.
That's literally what the Boutons do.
They create pathways, lines in the mind, right?
Which know after circumstances in life can eat entirely efface.
The intellect is now taking shape and the affections receiving direction and strength.
Repeated acts in a given course become habits.
These may be modified by severe training and afterlife, but our seldom changed.
The problem with developing these bad habits is the boutons don't go away.
Ever.
But I got good news for you.
Don't give up.
Good news for you.
We'll come back to it.
Don't worry about it.
We got good news.
Here it is.
She says, once formed habits become more and more firmly impressed upon the character.
The intellect is continually receiving its mold from opportunities and advantages ill or well improved.
Day by day we form characters which place the students as well disciplined soldiers under the banner of Prince Emmanuel or rebels under the banner of the Prince of Darkness.
Which shall it be?
That's why Philippians 2.5 says, let this mind be in you.
Which was also in Christ Jesus.
I can't leave you hanging on the habits thing.
The secret to beating a bad habit is to create a good one and make that line deeper than the first line.
So if you get addicted to, let's say, you know, you get the habit, you come home from school and you, you know, you're, you know, you're 13 years old, you come home from school, you plop, you throw your book back down, plop on the couch, grab a glass of milk and cookies or whatever you do and you start watching TV.
If that's your habit, you have to maybe change your environment till you're not coming to the same place and create the habit that when you come home,
You get an apple, that's a water, and you study.
If you do it long enough, that groove will take over the first groove.
Here's the problem with bad habits and the devil.
The devil understands that he does not want to talk about in the next section.
He does not just give you the physical habit.
When those guys take that cigarette and put it to their mouth, that's the hand mouth part, that's the habit.
But what happens when they smoke the cigarette?
Nicotine is released.
which is as addicting as cocaine.
Cigarettes are so addicting.
So imagine now you got the habit and you've got the nicotine.
That's what the devil works to do.
We'll talk more about the drugs now on the next section.
We're going to give you a 10 minute break.
We'll come back together and we're going to go deeper into it.
But before we go, any major, major pressing questions, it's hard to do questions because we get lost in time doing questions.
But all right, there's one there.
Actually, video games are worse.
So the reason video games are so bad, and I can't, the only video game I ever played was an old school Atari.
It had one stick and one button.
That was it.
So I tried to play the new ones.
I came, there's two complicated, there's one thing with buttons.
But here's what happens.
Not only do you go into that trance because of the entertainment of a screen, but because you don't, and you participate because of the mirror neurons, but with a video game because you are actively directing it, it is even more
It puts you into even more of a trance.
And this is why you see young people really can't get free from that thing.
It really puts you into a bad place.
And I'm going to talk about marijuana, and what you find is that when you combine it with stuff like marijuana, it's a wrap.
I have parents call me and tell me their son, I've had this happen several times, will not come out of the basement.
They're down there playing video games, smoking weed, and they won't do anything else.
So video games are even worse in a sense.
Because you put in what they did with video games from what they tell me because I can't play them.
It's like a movie.
So you start and you actually follow a plot all the way through to an end.
So you literally participate in killing.
And some of them they say even have some sexual abusive scenes and stuff like that in it.
I don't know.
I don't play that stuff.
But imagine what that does to the mind.
So take a 10 minute break.
Be back.
Let's pray this call out this section.
And we'll take your question when we come back.
Father God, we thank you for
This opportunity, Lord, just to share, we just ask for your Holy Spirit, Lord.
We are asking, Lord, for Holy Ghost power to continue.
Let us not think we are our habits or are our bad behaviors.
Let us not barter in shame either.
Let us understand that the blood of Jesus Christ still washes.
It still cleanses.
And as we go through the rest of the talks, Lord, let us be encouraged that what Jesus did for us is enough is our prayer in Jesus's name.
Amen.
This media was produced by Audioverse for GYC, Generation Youth Christ.
If you would like to learn more about GYC, please visit gycweb.org.
Or if you would like to listen to more sermons, download the free Audioverse app or visit audioverse.org.